[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today in
this series on the foundations of algebra,
we're going to answer the very important
question of what exactly is a polynomial.
A polynomial is a fundamental building block of
algebra, and in most treatments of the subject,
it's introduced only in a vague
and imprecise way. But fundamental
building blocks of mathematics
have to be defined very precisely.
So I remind you that the usual idea is that
a polynomial is some kind of expression
involving an unknown variable or general
variable, x, or perhaps y, or perhaps a,
or perhaps b. And this polynomial is allowed
to have various manifestations or different
expressions. The idea is that it should be
built up just from the three operations:
addition, subtraction, and multiplication. So
these are all considered polynomials in x in
the usual formulation of things. Another
approach is to think of a polynomial as a
function—something that inputs an x and outputs
another number given by an expression like this.
Alright, so our approach is going to be a
little bit different. Roughly, our idea is
that a polynomial is a polynomial form; in fact,
it's a particular form that involves linear
combinations of something we're going to call
alpha. I'll tell you what alpha is in a second,
but here are some examples of the kind of thing
that we're interested in establishing. So this
would be something like a polynomial P = 3 + 5α
+ 27α². It’s what you would usually think of as
a polynomial in alpha, but we'll prefer to write
this rather in this more laborious fashion. So
instead of 3, we'll write 3α⁰; instead of α,
we'll write α¹, so that the powers of alpha
are increasing from 0 onwards. That's what
a polynomial for us is going to look like.
And now I have to tell you how do we connect
this to poly numbers and what is this object
alpha. We've made the observation before that
a poly number with just one entry at the top,
the degree zero spot, acts essentially like
a number. The arithmetic for those poly
numbers is just the same as the arithmetic for
ordinary numbers. So the first poly number that
goes beyond that arithmetic is this one right
here, the poly number (0, 1), and that's what
we are calling alpha. So alpha for us is just
a particular poly number—that one right there.
Alright, then it's easy to check
that α² is the poly number (0,
0, 1), and α³ will be (0, 0, 0, 1),
and in general, any power of alpha,
say α^k, will be a string of k zeros and then
a 1. That means we can rewrite a general poly
number as a linear combination of these
powers of alpha. For example, (2, 7, 0,
3) can be written as 2α⁰ + 7α¹ + 3α³ (we've left
out the α² term because its coefficient is zero).
This poly number (0, 0, 0, 13, 0, 52)
can be written in a rather short way
by just ignoring the zeros and writing
13α³ + 52α⁵. And so we say this is the
standard form for a poly number, or if we want
to be more specific, the standard alpha form,
where we write out the poly number in powers
of alpha and we use this convention for α⁰,
α¹, α², α³, and so on. We agree to leave out
the coefficients with zero, as in this case
here, where we don't write 0α⁰ + 0α¹ and so on,
except in one special case—the zero polynomial.
We'll write that as 0α⁰. We have to write
something, and so that's what we'll write.
So you can see one of the advantages of
this standard alpha form for a poly number,
namely that when the poly number
has lots of zeros in it, we save
ourselves the trouble of having to write
all those zeros. We're just concentrating
on the terms which have strictly
positive entries, nonzero entries.
So here then is our main definition: a positive
polynomial is a positive poly number written in
standard alpha form. So a polynomial is just a
poly number written in a particular way. This is
then not a new mathematical object; we're still
just talking about positive poly numbers, but
we're writing them in a new way. We've seen this
before, actually. When we started off this series,
we defined natural numbers as a string of ones—I
hope you remember that was the definition of what
a natural number was—but then at some point,
we changed in practice to writing a natural
number not as a string of ones but in terms of
the Hindu-Arabic system. So now, when we write
a natural number like 345, we're not writing a
whole bunch of ones; we're just writing 3, 4,
or 5. But really, it's the same mathematical
object, just written in a new way. It's
convenient in mathematics to have alternate ways
of writing sometimes the same mathematical object.
So please stop the video now and have a look
at these eight examples and try to figure out
which of these are positive polynomials.
Alright, I'll give you a moment to think.
[Pause]
Okay, so the answer is: only one of them. The
first one is a positive polynomial, and the rest
are not. Let's see why not. This one here has
a negative sign. We so far have not introduced
negative signs—all the coefficients have to be
positive natural numbers. Later on, of course,
we're going to include that as a possibility
too, but right now, we're just talking about
positive polynomials. What about this one? Well,
we're being a little bit fussy here. This 4 does
not have an α⁰ in front of it. We insist that
all the terms have coefficients times powers
of alpha. The trouble with allowing something
like this is that it's easy to get confused
between this number 4 being an actual number or
being a poly number. We want numbers and poly
numbers to be different objects technically,
so that's why we're not going to allow this.
How about this? This seems to be alright, but it's
not because it's not written out in the standard
form. The standard form requires that you start
with the degree 0 term, then the degree 1 term,
then the degree 2 term, and so on. Well, you might
say, "Well, you could expand this," and you could,
but that's not something that we want to do. If
you give me an example of a positive poly number,
it better be in the required form, unlike a
computer; otherwise, I'm not going to accept
it. So in other words, I'm not willing to do
the work involved in expanding this out and
putting it in standard form. The person coming
with the object has to do that work themselves.
What's wrong with 0? Well, we agree
that 0 is going to be written 0 times
α⁰ because it's level 0, so it should have
an α⁰ in front of it. How about this one:
α⁷ + 2α⁴? It's not in the standard form.
The powers of alpha have to be increasing.
αⁿ and α^m—these are variable things. They're
not powers of alpha in the sense that we're
talking about—there have to be natural
numbers up here. How about 2α⁴ + α⁵ - α⁴?
This negative sign means that it's not
allowed, even though we could simplify
this to α⁴ + α⁵. If we did that, then it would be
a positive polynomial, but right now, it's not.
So we're being very fussy, we're being
very clear. We're only allowing objects
that fulfill the specifications of
the definition. This is a very good
attitude to have when you're laying
the foundations for mathematics.
Next time we're going to talk about factoring
positive polynomials or positive poly numbers.
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]